paralysis to the lower jaw. That was the only
symptom he had. I buried him, and that night my
brother, who was in Baylor Med School, came home
from college, and we told him about the dog. He dug
the dog up, sent the head to Austin for
examination, and proved that he had rabies. So my
father and my neighbor and I and my brother all had
to take the Pasteur treatment, which consisted of
25 doses. You've been through this? Yes, I've been
through it when I was a child. And then during the
rabies epidemic here in the cattle, I took the
vaccine at least once a year for three years just to
keep myself immunized. If you have rabies, you
die. Now, tell me about the past year treatment
that you're talking about for rabies in humans.
It's a series of 25 doses you said. Well, I don't
remember if it was 20 or 25, but it seemed like 25 the
first time I took it. But it's been perfected now
and people can be immunized. Most veterinarians
take a dose of rabies vaccine annually just to keep
them immunized. But if you get bit by an animal that
has rabies, then you have to take a series of
vaccines hoping that you will be protected and not
die. I lost a classmate who graduated when I did He
was bitten by a dog back in the 1940s, and even
though he took the treatment, he developed rabies
and died. So I've always had a respect for it. Yes,
you hear that the vaccines are administered, you
know, I don't know whether this is true or not, in
the stomach. Is that true? No, they're
administered in the muscle of the abdomen. Muscle
of the abdomen. Abdominal muscle. Okay. People
get mixed up when they're talking about the
stomach and the abdominal muscles. They use a
short needle going into the muscle of the abdomen.
And you've had these treatments? And you can take
them in your arms. I took them in my arms usually
after I became an adult. Mm-hmm. but uh... so
you've been through this so-called painful
treatment of rabies as young as eight years old Oh,
yes. Eight or ten. I can't remember exactly when it
was, but I was a child. But I was interested in
treating all the sick animals in the
neighborhood. The type of rabies you just
described, as early as you say, was called dumb
rabies, where the paralysis of the lower jaw, the
jaw fell down, the tongue hung out. But there's
also the other type of rabies that everybody
recognizes, the foaming of the mouth. And leaving
home. Roaming. The most dangerous type of rabies
is the dumb rabies because people don't recognize
it. If a cow has dumb rabies, she just stands around
and slobbers and drools saliva and people think
she has a corncob hung across the roof of her mouth
and they examine her and expose themselves. That
happened to one man and he had to take the rabies
shots and it made him sick. Physically sick. He had
to be in bed for a month or two. I knew two people in
Henderson who had that problem. Some people do
have reactions to the vaccine, but 99% of them
fully recover after a month or two. So you still
need to take the vaccine if you expose yourself.
Right. Okay, so that's something I've learned
about rabies this morning, no doubt about that.
May I mention oak buds and acorn poisoning? Do we
have time? Sure. That is something that we still
see. Oak buds poison cattle, especially in early
spring. If you're not feeding them enough and they
start eating oak buds. I saw the first herd
affected. Again, it was Ralph Ballinger's caves
out north of Henderson. I've also seen people cut
timber in spring and summer and the cattle have...
perhaps not quite as much grass as they want, so
they go out there and eat all of the oak leaves on
these trees. And they can get down and die. Mary
Kelly lost four or five cows one year when she was
selling oak timber. So you must be careful that you
don't let your cattle eat too many oak leaves Oak
buds in the spring are too many acorns. In the fall
of the year, if you turn your cattle into a pasture
with a lot of acorns on the ground and they get
started eating them, it seems like that they like
acorns. And if you don't feed them hay and get them
off of those acorns, if they stay in a woods pasture
and eat too many acorns for a week, you can lose
them. I saw that happen to several people. So
that's something that is ever-present danger.
Right. If you could, I know that veterinary
medicine has sort of a lot of things... pre-World
War II era and a post-World War II era, and that came
with the advent of the A&M Medical School, which
had its first graduates in 1920 and, of course, was
in the war a short 20 years later. What about some of
the remedies that were used before the war and
after the war since there'd been a lot of, I'm sure,
test run and research done? some of the favorite
old remedies that many of us remember being used
when we were children and up until the world war two
era we might say were for hollow tail which was now
these remedies were used in cattle hollow tail was
a common uh... condition that was being diagnosed
by people who didn't know what was wrong with the
cow. They knew that she was down and couldn't get
up. She was paralyzed. They would feel of her tail,
find a soft spot due to a deficiency, and call it
hollow tail. They would split the tail and put
something like salt and pepper or turpentine on
it. Then, of course, if they treated the cow
properly with enough food and water, a few of them
would live. Another very common thing in treating
a cow with mineral deficiency we call milk fever
was seen when a cow would have a calf and sometime
maybe in 48 hours she would become down and unable
to walk and go into a coma those cattle were
commonly referred to as having milk fever even
though they didn't have any fever the temperature
would be below normal it was a misnomer and before
the days of graduate veterinarians who injected
calcium gluconate solution into the vein to make
the cow overcome the disease and get up and start
walking off in 10 or 15 minutes. The common
treatment was pumping air into their udder. And,
of course, it would work because it would make the
cow quit producing milk, and she would gradually
get better, and most of them would survive but end
up with a case of mastitis, infection up in the
quarters. And the loss of the cud, as people called
it, when a cow got sick and quit chewing her cud, as
most sick cows do, some people thought they would
have to take an old dish rag and poke it down their
throat to give them another cud, which, of course,
some cows would die from that treatment. Sounds
like it. And I saw many cows that were being treated
with with mistletoe that was being fed to them due
to the cow that was retaining her afterbirth more
than two or three days. And of course they would get
word and they'd start feeding her mistletoe. What
would the mistletoe do? Would it help? No, the
mistletoe wouldn't help. But if the cow didn't get
an infection and die, and she passed the placenta
or afterbirth in five or six days, then the
mistletoe would get credit for curing her. So it's
just luck if it happened, huh? Yes. You just would
have been feeding them anything, huh? Anything.
And most of them will, of course, if you're lucky.
survive, but they don't all pass their afterbirth
in 48 hours. It depends on the nutrition that the
cow's receiving as much as anything. Then on
horses and mules, a very common thing that we saw
was colic, commonly called blocked kidneys, and
people were commonly using turpentine or
kerosene and a saucer held to the navel of the cow,
and if that the horse or mule. If it would be
absorbed then they thought it would probably work
and it would work in the fact that you'd get up and
start leading the horse around and those that had
gas colic would start passing the gas and recover.
Then there were several other things that were
being used for worms in horses If they looked
wormy, they'd feed them a plug of tobacco. And that
did kill a few of the worms. Blind stagers, which
was the common name for sleeping sickness or
encephalomyelitis, people would split the skin
on the forehead and insert a dime. And of course, I
don't think any of them ever lived, but they would
get treated. Then fistula of the withers, which
was a disease that some of us remember. and still
see one occasionally. They would drain the
abscess, which occurred on the upper part of the
shoulder blade, drain the abscess, and insert
several coins to help keep it draining. Fish of the
weathers, of course, could be treated in other
ways, and we cured some of them. But it was always a
long, drawn-out treatment. And the dogs that
would have distemper The most common treatment
was to soak three or four small corn cobs in a
mixture of Vicksave and turpentine and string it
on a wire or a cord and use it as a collar on these
dogs. Of course, some dogs with distemper always
recover, regardless of what you do, if they don't
develop pneumonia or encephalitis. These were
some of the treatments that were sort of homespun,
I guess you would call it, and you can't give much
credit to, I guess, any one of them as being
particularly helpful. Kind of nature took its
course one way or the other, but I guess human
beings had to act in some way or another, didn't
they? But what are some of the big changes you've
seen in the veterinary medicine since World War
II? Since World War II, the changes that I have
noticed... would be the building of modern
veterinary hospitals for treating and
hospitalizing animals in most counties of Texas,
bone surgery for fractures in pets and domestic
livestock, abdominal surgery such as
C-sections, tumor surgery, and surgery for
horses that have colic with twisted intestines,
x-rays, are commonly used now in the diagnosis of
diseases in animals. And very extensive
laboratory tests are made to diagnose and treat
animals. And in some areas you have embryo
transplants in cattle and horses, which is a big
business. There they take the embryo from the
valuable registered animal and transplant it
into the non-registered sheep cow or horse, mare,
and grow the registered coat. The surgery for
herniated discs in vertebrae of dogs and cats is
very common. The new vaccines and new drugs for
preventing and treating diseases that are
available is a revolutionary change. You've seen
a lot of them happen and experienced most of the
diseases, I guess, here in Russ County. What are
some of the diseases that were taken care of by
veterinary medicine over the years that we don't
have a problem with now? Well, the most common
diseases that I recall being eradicated
completely would be the Texas tick fever by
dipping the cattle. And that was eradicated in the
30s. hoof and mouth disease by slaughtering all
the infected herds. When I moved here in 47, a
veterinarian who had been ahead of me left
Henderson and went to Mexico to help the Mexican
government. The hog cholera, which all of our
older people remember was so common, has been
completely eradicated. The loin disease and
creeps that we mentioned earlier, by using
minerals in their feeds, has been eradicated. The
X disease that we mentioned has been eradicated.
Vesicular exanthema in swine was a disease that
caused ulcers on the nose and mouth of hogs. I only
saw one case. I was called by a man who had bought a
hog at the auction barn, and after he bought her, he
noticed it. He carried her onto his farm, even
though I told him that it looked like it might be
vesicular exanthema, a new disease that had just
been described in the newspapers. Well, he took
her onto his farm and exposed his herd. And then two
weeks later, he called me and told me what he had
done. And we had to call the state veterinarian who
came up here and killed most of his hogs to
eradicate the vesicular exanthema, which is
similar in clinical symptoms, similar to the foot
and mouth disease or hoof and mouth disease in
cattle, which was eradicated. Our guest this
morning, Dr. Hugh M. Phillips, retired doctor of
veterinary medicine practice, 38 years here in
Henderson from 1947 until 1985. And as I said,
we've been running over on the roadshow a little
bit this morning, but my goodness, we've got Dr.
Phillips here, and we're taping this for the book
that's going to be coming out, and the title of the
book will be The History of Veterinary Medicine
Today. in Texas, and we've covered it statewide.
We've also covered it countywide and how Dr.
Phillips came to be here and he and his family in the
Henderson area. We've, of course, gotten some
phone calls over the past hour and 20 minutes or so,
which I'm sure that you'll be able to refer to these
Dr. Phillips from Henderson and Russ County,
people involved in A&M. Mr. Milner, who was
president, you might want to address that in just a
minute. Well, Mr. Milner, of course, was one of the
presidents, and he not only lived on the A&M
campus, and I lived in a dormitory called Milner
Dorm one year, but he lived here in Henderson in
what we used to call the Milner Addition out where
the Baptist College is now located. We also had Mr.
Gathright, who was a president of A&M. He's buried
here. Milner And Gathrider both buried here in the
Old City Cemetery. Okay. And let's see, there's a
teacher down at A&M from the area, I believe, Mr.
Anderson? Dr. Anderson. Right. Dr. Jim Anderson,
the son of Mr. Gilbert Anderson, who used to be the
Three Bell Brothers manager, is one of our best
teachers at A&M in the Department of Physiology.
He's still there, right? He's still there. I
visited with him about a month ago when I was at A&M.
Any other Rusconians or East Texans you recall
involved in the vet college? Well, we had one
veterinarian here who stayed about two months.
And Dr. James Denton, he also rented the building
from Mr. Brown. And he was ahead of me, immediately
ahead of me. I followed him. He fell in love with a
girl from Dallas. and decided to get married, and
they moved out to Cisco, Texas, and had three
little boys. And Cisco was nothing to compare to
Henderson in size or in industry. So after being
there and having three little boys and getting
hungry, he moved and went down to teach at A&M. He
became an excellent teacher in large animal
clinics at A&M. And I've teased him many times
about leaving Henderson and going to Cisco out
west Texas. Right, I believe it's this side
Abilene. Yes. I don't know why he chose Cisco. I've
forgotten. Over there by Eastland and in that
area. Yeah, that's way out there. Well, Dr.
Phillips, we've covered a lot this morning, the
history of veterinary medicine in Texas, also
history of veterinary medicine in Russ County.
Any other things that come to mind right now while
we're here? Something interesting I wanted to
mention is a conversation I had with Mr. Pete
Smith. And at that time, he told me that his
brother, Virgil Smith, was one of the tick
inspectors. And back in the early 1930s, Virgil
Smith, most of you remember, owned Auction Barn,
was one of the owners, was working for the state as a
tick inspector. they were making seventy five
dollars a month furnishing his own horse also
uh... mister gordon brown who was sheriff here in
the early fifties was a tick inspector and of
course Back in those days, a lot of the people
didn't want to dip their cattle. A few of them
refused, and they would have to be forced by the
sheriff to dip their cattle. And Shelby County and
Houston County were noted for having more
trouble. One man was killed in Shelby County, and I
remember Pete Smith told me that his brother,
Virgil Smith, when he was transferred from here to
Houston County, Down there they let him carry a
pistol with him for protection because many of the
people decided they would not dip the old milk cow.
People get attached to the old boss, you know,
bossy or whatever they called her, and didn't want
her dipped. So in order to eradicate the ticks and
the disease, People were forced to dip their
cattle, whether they wanted to or not. I thought
that would be interesting. Some of the people who
worked as tick inspectors that we know. Turned out
to be a dangerous job in one case there. It did. Dr.
Hugh M. Phillips, our guest this morning, retired
doctor of veterinary medicine. And let's see,
you, I was trying to go back through my notes here.
You graduated what year from the veterinary, 43?
1943, I went into the Army. Okay. Okay. So you
practiced until 1985 and practiced here in
Henderson for 38 years since 1947. Gosh, we've had
a marathon this morning, but I believe this was
very necessary in the recording of the research
you've done, not only for the state of Texas as a
whole, but for our East Texas area and experience
from your 38-year career here in Russ County. Dr.
Phillips, we again appreciate you very much this
morning putting up with us and going through this
entire history with us. We appreciate it. Thank
you, Chipper. Veterinary medicine is close to my
heart, and I enjoy doing anything that helps
people. Right. Thank you very much, sir. Okay,
that's going to be it for the road show this
morning. We do have a full week for you for the rest
of the week, too. Let me remind you that tomorrow
morning we're going to be talking with the Noon
Lion.